openHAB 4 blog post (#412)
openhab/website: blog/2023-07-23-openhab-4-0-release.md

---
layout: BlogPost
category: blog
title: openHAB 4.0 Release
author: Kai Kreuzer and others
date: '2023-07-23T18:00:00+02:00'
previewimage: /uploads/summer23.jpg
tags:
  - news
excerpt: >-
  A new major release has arrived! openHAB 4 brings some exciting new features and several improvements for our users as well as our devs!
---

> A new major release has arrived! openHAB 4 brings some exciting new features and several improvements for our users as well as our devs!

Author: See https://github.com/openhab/website/pull/412/commits/8bd177db548f3dffab7897daa287f3a415128cf7.

> We finally reached feature parity between UI-based and file-based configurations with UI support for both transformation and persistence configuration, and moved to Java 17 to give our devs access to great new language features. 

Reviewer: Perhaps we should also mention a few other benefits from upgrading to Java 17? For example:
- Security enhancements.
- Performance improvements (and reduced memory consumption).
- Making sure we can upgrade external libraries and frameworks we depend upon.

So it's basically about staying current with the latest technology. Maybe something like "staying in sync with the evolving ecosystem". ChatGPT can help. 🙂 I just feel we need to justify and highlight this upgrade a bit more than merely for providing newer language features to the developers. Just a sentence or two.

In the 3.0 blog post we had: 
> Moving from Java 8 to Java 11 brings the language features on a current level and ensures that openHAB continues to run on JVMs that receive security patches.

Author: Thanks for your thoughts, I now have:

> As quite usual for new openHAB major releases, we also upgraded to Java 17 to stay in sync with the evolving Java ecosystem. Java 17 brings a wealth of benefits to our user and especially our developers, including security enhancements, performance improvements and reduced memory usage as well as new language features and APIs.

See https://github.com/openhab/website/commit/8bd177db548f3dffab7897daa287f3a415128cf7.

---
layout: BlogPost
category: blog
title: openHAB 4.0 Release
author: Kai Kreuzer and others
date: '2023-07-23T18:00:00+02:00'
previewimage: /uploads/summer23.jpg
tags:
  - news
excerpt: >-
  A new major release has arrived! openHAB 4 brings some exciting new features and several improvements for our users as well as our developers!
---
A new major release has arrived! openHAB 4 brings some exciting new features and several improvements for our users as well as our developers!

> With openHAB4, we have finally reached feature parity between UI-based and file-based configurations with UI support for both transformation and persistence configuration, added support for using scripts as transformations and profiles, and levelled up Units of Measurement (UoM) support!

Reviewer 2: Maybe somehow add that scripts as transformations are available for all languages, nit just JS.

---
layout: BlogPost
category: blog
title: openHAB 4.0 Release
author: Florian Hotze and others
date: '2023-07-23T18:00:00+02:00'
previewimage: /uploads/summer23.jpg
tags:
  - news
excerpt: >-
  A new major release has arrived! openHAB 4 brings some exciting new features and several improvements for our users as well as our developers!
---
A new major release has arrived! openHAB 4 brings some exciting new features and several improvements for our users as well as our developers!

> With openHAB4, we have finally reached feature parity between UI-based and file-based configurations with UI support for both transformation and persistence configuration, added support for using any of the supported script languages for transformations and profiles, and levelled up Units of Measurement (UoM) support!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With openHAB4, we have finally reached feature parity between UI-based and file-based configurations, with UI support for both transformation and persistence configuration. Additionally, we have added support for using any of the supported script languages for transformations and profiles, and we've leveled up Units of Measurement (UoM) support.
```

# Highlights

As this is a major release, there are some major (breaking) changes (like the switch to Java 17), but there is no single big new thing (like the introduction of MainUI in openHAB 3) to learn about.
Instead, we have quite a large number of new features and enhancements, and we hope everyone finds something that matters to him.

Therefore, please have a look at the [**release notes**](https://github.com/openhab/openhab-distro/releases/tag/4.0.0) and check out the following highlights.

## Core Runtime Enhancements

## UI Enhancements

_Florian Hotze, openHAB Maintainer_

Especially as a new member of the UI maintainers team (i.e. duo — it’s just Yannick Schaus and me), I’m really excited to introduce you to the following enhancements, which are only a part of all the changes that have been contributed.

### Blockly

_Stefan Höhn, openHAB Blockly Maintainer_

<p align="center"><img style="max-width: 80%;" src="/uploads/2023-07-23-openhab-4-0-release/blockly4.0.png"/></p>

Lot's has happened since openHAB 3, in particular promoting all blocks to the new and latest JavaScript Engine that comes with openHAB 4.

> Not only does that generate even more cleaner code, it also allows to implement many more feature that would have been hard to provide. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Not only does that generate even more cleaner code, but it also allows the implementation of many more features that would have been hard to provide. 
```

This is not possible with icons from the classic icon set because these icons have a hard-coded color palette, but it is possible with icons from other icon sources and with added user SVG icons containing "currentColor" as the fill color.
Basic UI supports this color feature for openHAB icons only if an option is enabled.
Color support for other icon sources is supported by default.

For more details, please read [the documentation](https://www.openhab.org/docs/ui/sitemaps.html#label-value-and-icon-colors).

#### Icons provided by bindings

A binding can now make specific icons related to channels available to the user, especially when no appropriate category/icon is available in the classic icon set.
Few bindings have already integrated this feature, for example the [OpenUV binding](https://www.openhab.org/addons/bindings/openuv/).

## Addon Enhancements

_Jacob Laursen, openHAB Maintainer_

> 18 new bindings are included, supporting new devices and services:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
17 new addons are included, supporting new devices and services:
```

to be precise. 14 bindings, 2 transformations, 1 persistence and 1 automation - the automation is jsscriptingnashorn, so we probably shouldn't count it.

Color support for other icon sources is supported by default.

For more details, please read [the documentation](/docs/ui/sitemaps.html#label-value-and-icon-colors).

## New input field for sitemap UIs

No new user interface elements have been added for sitemap UIs since openHAB version 1. It finally arrives in version 4 with the introduction of a new UI element expected by users, namely the input field.

```java
Input item=<itemname> [label="<labelname>"] [icon="<iconname>"] [inputHint="<inputHint>"]
```

This element allows entering of text, numbers and dates/times and updating the underlying items.
Text, number or number with unit values and dates/times can be updated in the respective item types.

The parameter `inputHint` will give a hint to the user interface to use a specific widget adapted to a specific use. For example, it can be a time picker or a date picker.  Valid values for the parameter are `text`, `number`, `date`, `time` and `datetime`. Support of these widget types vary by user interface and/or browser.

This new input field is already supported in Basic UI and in the Android app.

> Many thanks to Mark Herwege who fully implemented this new For examplefeature (sitemap syntax update in core framework, implement in Basic UI and in the Android app).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Many thanks to Mark Herwege who fully implemented this new feature (sitemap syntax update in core framework, implement in Basic UI and in the Android app).
```

Author: Done in https://github.com/openhab/website/pull/412/commits/db992015e75b37451e0eed0381e7eee8827b68c9.

But that's not all!
As quite usual for new openHAB major releases, we also upgraded to Java 17 to stay in sync with the evolving Java ecosystem.
Java 17 brings a wealth of benefits to our user and especially our developers, including security enhancements, performance improvements and reduced memory usage as well as new language features and APIs.

As this is a new major release, we have a number of breaking changes that are required for the new features and improvements.
So, please have a look at our [**official release notes**](https://github.com/openhab/openhab-distro/releases/tag/4.0.0) to learn about all breaking changes, new add-ons, enhancements and fixes.

With that being said, we again want to share some statistics that show the progress in numbers.

# Activity

<!-- Share some stats about PRs, LOC etc. like in https://www.openhab.org/blog/2022-06-26-openhab-3-3-release.html#activity -->
<!-- Thank major contributors like in https://www.openhab.org/blog/2022-12-19-openhab-3-4-release.html -->

# Highlights

> As this is a major release, there are some major (breaking) changes, but there is no single big new thing (like the introduction of MainUI in openHAB 3) to learn about.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
As this is a major release, there are some major (breaking) changes, but there is no single big new thing (like the introduction of Main UI in openHAB 3) to learn about.
```

Instead, we have quite a large number of new features and enhancements, and we hope everyone finds something that matters to him.

Therefore, please have a look at the [**release notes**](https://github.com/openhab/openhab-distro/releases/tag/4.0.0) and check out the following highlights.

## Core Runtime Enhancements

> 

Reviewer 2: _Jan N. Klug, openHAB Maintainer_

A lot of changes are under-the-hood.
Some of them can't be seen directly, but they improve your openHAB experience.
The core support for some UI features (like managing transformations and persistence from UI) resulted in large refactoring of the underlying core components.
This not only future-proofed our code, it also resulted in performance improvements and bug fixes.
This is also true for the watch-service (the component that tracks changes to files) and the event handling in general. 

There are two other points I would like to point out: units of measurement, scripting and thing upgrades. 

### Units of Measurement (UoM)

The finally tried to make handling of units more consistent in openHAB.
In some cases the "old" code had surprising effects (e.g. changing the display unit in a state description corrupted persisted data).

I strongly recommend to re-read the [**documentation**](/docs/concepts/units-of-measurement.html) and the [**upgrade instructions**](_________how do I link to the release notes of another release?_____________).

To make a long story short: We know introduced a `unit` metadata that fixes the unit for a given item. 
This unit is assumed if a value with no unit is send to the item and the same unit is used when data is persisted.
The unit set in a state description is only used for displaying, it does no longer affect the handling of the item's state internally.

### Scripting

#### Transformation and Profile

openHAB 3.4 introduced the `SCRIPT` transformation, but a profile was still missing.
We used the introduction of the profile to also improve handling of the transformation.
With openHAB 4 you can use any scripting language you like to create transformation scripts (even in the UI, see below) and use all of these as a profile when linking channels and items.

#### Startup Behavior

With the increasing popularity of scripting languages besides openHAB's class DSL (like JavaScript and Ruby) some issues regarding the startup behavior became more obvious.
For openHAB 4 we re-worked the startup process and it finally is much more deterministic startup behavior.
The runtime now ensures that the necessary add-ons are initialized before it tries to run rules.

#### Rule Triggers

In most scripting languages information about the reason the rule triggered is available, but in the past this was limited to item events (i.e. no information was given for time-based triggers or start-level-triggers).
With openHAB 4 you have much more control: You can extract the information about the rule trigger for all trigger types.

### Thing Upgrades

If you used managed (i.e. UI configured) things in the past, you'll have noticed: when a breaking changes in a binding occurs, you have to delete the thing and re-add it, requiring a full new configuration (including channel-links).

With openHAB 4 we introduced "thing upgrades".
Add-on developers can now provide instructions to automatically upgrade things when openHAB upgrades.
You'll notice this is already the case for a lot (but unfortunately not all) breaking changes in this release.

Author: Thanks for providing that section! I've just pushed it.

Wrt to the link to the update instructions for UoM: I've added a link that will link the 4.0 release notes upgrade UoM section, it should work as long as no-one changes that heading name or adds another heading named "upgrading".

Editor:
* [Search](/docs/configuration/blockly/rules-blockly-before-using.html#searching-the-workspace) within the blockly workspace via Cmd/Ctrl-F
* Shadow Blocks are now automatically converted to real blocks, which is good when you want to reuse them by duplicating the block 
* [Cross-Rule Copy & Paste](https://next.openhab.org/docs/configuration/blockly/rules-blockly-before-using.html#cross-rule-copy-paste)

All new blocks have received comprehensive documentation at the [Blockly Reference](/docs/configuration/blockly/).

### Scene Editor

Given several discussions on the community, support for scenes was a long awaited feature — openHAB 4 has it.

Basically, scenes are only a set of Items and states that the Items are commanded to when the scene is enabled.
In openHAB, a simple rule would be enough to achieve that functionality, but it would either require some coding or several UI interactions.

The scene editor allows you to define Items and their respective target states very easily.
A sync state button allows to store the current Item state as the target state, and another button allows you to test the currently defined target state.

> Scenes can be triggered from MainUI widgets and, as they are basically just rules without triggers, from other rules. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Scenes can be triggered from Main UI widgets and, as they are basically just rules without triggers, from other rules. 
```

Even Blockly and the code of script actions are now searchable.

<!-- Add image here -->

For an exact list of entities the search checks your query against, please have a look at [the documentation](/docs/tutorial/tips-and-tricks.html#search).

### New Input Field for Sitemap UIs

_Laurent Garnier, openHAB Maintainer_

No new user interface elements have been added for sitemap UIs since openHAB version 1.
This finally changes with openHAB 4 with the introduction of a new UI element long-awaited by users: The `input` field.

```java
Input item=<itemname> [label="<labelname>"] [icon="<iconname>"] [inputHint="<inputHint>"]
```

This element allows entering of text, numbers and dates/times and updating the underlying items.
Text, number or number with unit values and dates/times can be updated in the respective item types.

The parameter `inputHint` will give a hint to the user interface to use a specific widget adapted to a specific use.
For example, it can be a time picker or a date picker.  Valid values for the parameter are `text`, `number`, `date`, `time` and `datetime`.
Support of these widget types vary by user interface and/or browser.

> This new input field is already supported in Basic UI and in the Android app.

Reviewer: Since this is a blog, perhaps we could bring it to life with an example usage and an image? It could be your own example with a manual meter reading, or perhaps an input text field for sending a toast to your LGTV with the text: "Dinner is ready :-)" for some fun. Time is short, but if you like the idea, I might be able to do a quick sitemap for that and screenshot it from my Android phone.

Reviewer 5: Please do it if you have time.

Reviewer: Just for inspiration...

items/tv.items
```java
Switch LGTV_Power "Power" <switch> { channel="lgwebos:WebOSTV:tv:power" }
Player LGTV_Control "Control" { channel="lgwebos:WebOSTV:tv:mediaPlayer" }
String LGTV_Toast "Toast { channel="lgwebos:WebOSTV:tv:toast" }
```

sitemaps/tv.sitemap
```perl
sitemap multimedia label="TV" {
    Switch item=LGTV_Power
    Default item=LGTV_Control visibility=[LGTV_Power==ON]
    Input item=LGTV_Toast icon="screen" inputHint="text" visibility=[LGTV_Power==ON]
}
```

Android app:
![image](https://github.com/openhab/website/assets/19519842/4317d85e-0c72-446e-b2ed-2347feb0f394)

LG TV:
![image](https://github.com/openhab/website/assets/19519842/e16d9002-33e1-45bd-8705-99cd3fe0080b)

Reviewer 5: Yes that is a fun example.

Reviewer: It sure beats the automated toasts saying "Laundry is ready". 😉

Reviewer 5: An example showing date picker would have been cool too.

Author: Do you mind creating a PR to include that example? 
I can add the missing UI screenshots meanwhile ...

Reviewer: I have some issues trying to fork your repository, and also don't have permissions to push directly. Can you copy from there? Just replace --- by ```

```
There are many use cases for this feature.
For example, it can be used for entering manual meter readings - or perhaps drawing attention from your family:

items/tv.items
---java
Switch LGTV_Power "Power" { channel="lgwebos:WebOSTV:tv:power" }
Player LGTV_Control "Control" { channel="lgwebos:WebOSTV:tv:mediaPlayer" }
String LGTV_Toast "Toast { channel="lgwebos:WebOSTV:tv:toast" }
---

sitemaps/tv.sitemap
---perl
sitemap multimedia label="TV" {
    Switch item=LGTV_Power
    Default item=LGTV_Control visibility=[LGTV_Power==ON]
    Input item=LGTV_Toast icon="screen" inputHint="text" visibility=[LGTV_Power==ON]
}
---

<!-- Add image here -->
```

Author: I've added this section and your screenshots from above, thanks!

# Highlights

As this is a major release, there are some major (breaking) changes, but there is no single big new thing (like the introduction of Main UI in openHAB 3) to learn about.
Instead, we have quite a large number of new features and enhancements, and we hope everyone finds something that matters to him.

Therefore, please have a look at the [**release notes**](https://github.com/openhab/openhab-distro/releases/tag/4.0.0) and check out the following highlights.

## Core Runtime Enhancements

_Jan N. Klug, openHAB Maintainer_

A lot of changes are under-the-hood.
Some of them can't be seen directly, but they all improve your openHAB experience.
The core support for some UI features (like managing transformations and persistence from UI) resulted in large refactoring of the underlying core components, which not only future-proofed our code, but also resulted in performance improvements and bug fixes.
This is also true for the watch-service (the component that tracks changes to files) and the event handling in general.

There are three things I would like to point out: Units of Measurement, scripting and thing upgrades.

### Units of Measurement (UoM)

> The finally tried to make handling of units more consistent in openHAB.

Reviewer 4: Something is missing in this sentence. Maybe "The" should be "We"?

In some cases the "old" code had surprising effects (e.g. changing the display unit in a state description corrupted persisted data).

I strongly recommend to re-read [the documentation](/docs/concepts/units-of-measurement.html) and the [upgrade instructions](https://github.com/openhab/openhab-distro/releases/tag/4.0.0#upgrading).

> To make a long story short: We know introduced a `unit` metadata that fixes the unit for a given Item.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To make a long story short: We now introduced `unit` metadata that fixes the unit for a given Item.
```

For an exact list of entities the search checks your query against, please have a look at [the documentation](/docs/tutorial/tips-and-tricks.html#search).

### New Input Field for Sitemap UIs

_Laurent Garnier, openHAB Maintainer_

No new user interface elements have been added for sitemap UIs since openHAB version 1.
This finally changes with openHAB 4 with the introduction of a new UI element long-awaited by users: The `input` field.

```java
Input item=<itemname> [label="<labelname>"] [icon="<iconname>"] [inputHint="<inputHint>"]
```

This element allows entering of text, numbers and dates/times and updating the underlying items.
Text, number or number with unit values and dates/times can be updated in the respective item types.

The parameter `inputHint` will give a hint to the user interface to use a specific widget adapted to a specific use.
For example, it can be a time picker or a date picker.  Valid values for the parameter are `text`, `number`, `date`, `time` and `datetime`.
Support of these widget types vary by user interface and/or browser.

This new input field is already supported in Basic UI and in the Android app.

> Many thanks to Mark Herwege ([@mherwege](https://github.com/mherwege)) who fully implemented this new feature (sitemap syntax update in core framework, implementation in Basic UI and in the Android app).

Reviewer: Perhaps this line should be moved down as last sentence for this chapter?

It is worth to mention, that [our other repositories](https://github.com/openhab) have also received numerous contributions (e.g. documentation), but listing them all would probably be too much here.
Thank you to all our contributors for driving openHAB forward!

Finally, it is time to shout out our top code contributors per repository (having done the most commits) for this new release:

- Jan ([@J-N-K](https://github.com/J-N-K)) for openHAB core
- Jacob ([@jlaur](https://github.com/jlaur)) for openHAB add-ons
- Laurent ([@lolodomo](https://github.com/lolodomo)) for openHAB add-ons
- Florian ([@florian-h05](https://github.com/florian-05)) for the openHAB Web UIs

All of them are also maintainers, which means besides of contributing code, they also review pull requests and participate in discussions on GitHub issues.
At present, there are 37 maintainers across all our repositories.
I extend a huge thank you to all my colleagues for their exceptional contributions in advancing openHAB!

# Highlights

As this is a major release, there are some major (breaking) changes, but there is no single big new thing (like the introduction of Main UI in openHAB 3) to learn about.

> Instead, we have quite a large number of new features and enhancements, and we hope everyone finds something that matters to him.

Reviewer 6: Use gender-neutral pronoun:
```suggestion
Instead, we have quite a large number of new features and enhancements, and we hope everyone finds something that matters to them.
```

Therefore, please have a look at the [**release notes**](https://github.com/openhab/openhab-distro/releases/tag/4.0.0) and check out the following highlights.

## Core Runtime Enhancements

_Jan N. Klug, openHAB Maintainer_

A lot of changes are under-the-hood.
Some of them can't be seen directly, but they all improve your openHAB experience.
The core support for some UI features (like managing transformations and persistence from UI) resulted in large refactoring of the underlying core components, which not only future-proofed our code, but also resulted in performance improvements and bug fixes.
This is also true for the watch-service (the component that tracks changes to files) and the event handling in general.

There are three things I would like to point out: Units of Measurement, scripting and thing upgrades.

### Units of Measurement (UoM)

> The finally tried to make handling of units more consistent in openHAB.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
We finally made handling of units more consistent in openHAB.
```

I strongly recommend to re-read [the documentation](/docs/concepts/units-of-measurement.html) and the [upgrade instructions](https://github.com/openhab/openhab-distro/releases/tag/4.0.0#upgrading).

To make a long story short: We know introduced a `unit` metadata that fixes the unit for a given Item.
This unit is assumed if a value with no unit is sent to the Item and the same unit is used when data is persisted.
The unit set in a state description is only used for displaying, it does no longer affect the handling of the Item's state internally.

### Scripting

#### Transformation and Profile

openHAB 3.4 introduced the `SCRIPT` transformation, but a profile was still missing.
We used the introduction of the profile to also improve handling of the transformation.
With openHAB 4 you can use any scripting language you like to create transformation scripts (even in the UI, see below) and use all of these as a profile when linking channels and Items.

Please have a look at [the documentation](/docs/configuration/transformations.html#script-transformation) for more information.

#### Startup Behavior

> With the increasing popularity of scripting languages besides openHAB's classic DSL (like JavaScript and Ruby) some issues regarding the startup behavior became more obvious.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
With the increasing popularity of scripting languages (like JavaScript and Ruby) besides openHAB's classic DSL some issues regarding the startup behavior became more obvious.
```

[openHAB core](https://github.com/openhab/openhab-core), which is like the heart of openHAB, has received 260 pull requests, 68 bug fixes and 94 enhancements with 13,171 lines of code added.
The number of pull requests has doubled up compared to our [winter release](/blog/2022-12-19-openhab-3-4-release.html).

17 new add-ons were introduced, and with 748 pull requests, 153 bug fixes and 214 enhancements resulted in 117,453 lines of add-on code added to [openHAB add-ons](https://github.com/openhab/openhab-addons).

Our [openHAB web UIs](https://github.com/openhab/openhab-webui) were also very actively developed, with 174 pull requests, 54 bug fixes and 83 enhancements and 10,440 lines of code added.
That's nearly three times the number of pull requests compared to our [winter release](/blog/2022-12-19-openhab-3-4-release.html).

It is worth to mention, that [our other repositories](https://github.com/openhab) have also received numerous contributions (e.g. documentation), but listing them all would probably be too much here.
Thank you to all our contributors for driving openHAB forward!

> Finally, it is time to shout out our top code contributors per repository (having done the most commits) for this new release:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, it is time to shout out to our top code contributors per repository (having done the most commits) for this new release:
```

The unit set in a state description is only used for displaying, it does no longer affect the handling of the Item's state internally.

### Scripting

#### Transformation and Profile

openHAB 3.4 introduced the `SCRIPT` transformation, but a profile was still missing.
We used the introduction of the profile to also improve handling of the transformation.
With openHAB 4 you can use any scripting language you like to create transformation scripts (even in the UI, see below) and use all of these as a profile when linking channels and Items.

Please have a look at [the documentation](/docs/configuration/transformations.html#script-transformation) for more information.

#### Startup Behavior

With the increasing popularity of scripting languages besides openHAB's classic DSL (like JavaScript and Ruby) some issues regarding the startup behavior became more obvious.
For openHAB 4 we re-worked the startup process, and it finally is a much more deterministic startup behavior.
The runtime now ensures that the necessary add-ons are initialized before it tries to run rules.

#### Rule Triggers

> In most scripting languages information about the reason the rule triggered is available, but in the past this was limited to Item events (i.e. no information was given for time-based triggers or start-level-triggers).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
In most scripting languages information about the reason why the rule has been triggered is available, but in the past this was limited to Item events (i.e. no information was given for time-based triggers or start-level-triggers).
```

With openHAB 4 you have much more control: You can extract the information about the rule trigger for all trigger types.

### Thing Upgrades

> If you used managed (i.e. UI configured) Things in the past, you'll have noticed: When a breaking change in a binding occurs, you have to delete the thing and re-add it, requiring a full re-configuration (including channel-links).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
If you used managed (i.e. UI-configured) Things in the past, you will have noticed that when a breaking change in a binding occured, you had to delete the thing and re-add it, requiring a full re-configuration (including channel-links).
```

Reviewer: occur**r**ed even. :)

> If you used managed (i.e. UI-configured) Things in the past, you will have noticed that when a breaking change in a binding occured, you had to delete the thing and re-add it, requiring a full re-configuration (including channel-links).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you used managed (i.e. UI-configured) Things in the past, you will have noticed that when a breaking change in a binding occurred, you had to delete the thing and re-add it, requiring a full re-configuration (including channel-links).
```

With openHAB 4 we introduced "Thing upgrades".
Add-on developers can now provide instructions to automatically upgrade things when openHAB upgrades.

> You'll notice this is already the case for a lot (but unfortunately not all) breaking changes in this release.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This is already the case for a lot (but unfortunately not all) breaking changes in this release.
```

## UI Enhancements

_Florian Hotze, openHAB Maintainer_

Especially as a new member of the UI maintainers team (i.e. duo — it’s just Yannick Schaus and me), I’m really excited to introduce you to the following enhancements, which are only a part of all the changes that have been contributed to our web UIs.

### Blockly

_Stefan Höhn, openHAB Blockly Maintainer_

<p align="center"><img style="max-width: 70%;" src="/uploads/2023-07-23-openhab-4-0-release/blockly4.0.png"/></p>

A lot has happened since openHAB 3, particularly with the promotion of all blocks to the new and latest JavaScript engine that comes with openHAB 4.

> Not only does that generate even more cleaner code, but it also allows the implementation of many more features that would have been hard to provide. 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Not only does that generate even cleaner code, but it also allows the implementation of many more features that would have been hard to provide. 
```

Therefore, all blocks have been rewritten for openHAB 4 to support the new JavaScript engine.

**How the 🦏 found the holy Graal - The new code generation**

Even though one may not notice it directly, the blocks are eventually used to automatically create code that can run on the openHAB server.
Please watch the YouTube video [Blockly as an ECMA-Script code generator](https://youtu.be/EdllUlJ7p6k?t=1739) for a live demo.

> The code that is generated can be viewed when clicking the button in the lower right corner of the blockly editor.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The code that is generated can be viewed when clicking the button in the lower right corner of the Blockly editor.
```

The generated rule code is run within the Java runtime (also known as JVM) on the openHAB server and as openHAB 4 has moved to Java 17, the old ECMAScript 5.1 is not directly available anymore within the JVM via Nashorn.
A replacement for the Nashorn JS is **GraalJS** ("the holy grail"), which is currently running **ECMAScript 2022** and therefore supports all modern JavaScript features, like arrow functions and private class fields and methods.
[**GraalJS**](https://github.com/oracle/graaljs) is already available in openHAB 3 when the [JavaScript Scripting add-on](/addons/automation/jsscripting/) is installed.
The [JavaScript Scripting add-on](/addons/automation/jsscripting/) also includes the [openHAB JavaScript library (openhab-js)](https://github.com/openhab/openhab-js), which in fact empowers most of the new Blockly features and allows the much cleaner code by providing a simple, pure JS API to openHAB.

**New Features in Blockly**

* Full Support of **U**nits **o**f **M**easurement with [5 brand-new blocks](/docs/configuration/blockly/rules-blockly-uom.html)

> * The [Math section](/docs/configuration/blockly/rules-blockly-standard-ext.html#math) was extended by a new bitshift block and extended rounding block

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* The [Math section](/docs/configuration/blockly/rules-blockly-standard-ext.html#math) has been extended by a new bitshift block and extended rounding block
```

* Metadata blocks allow direct access to [Item metadata](/docs/configuration/blockly/rules-blockly-items-things.html#item-metadata)

> * A historicState option was added to the [persistence blocks](/docs/configuration/blockly/rules-blockly-persistence.html#get-statistical-value-of-an-item)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* A historicState option has been added to the [persistence blocks](/docs/configuration/blockly/rules-blockly-persistence.html#get-statistical-value-of-an-item)
```

* Persistence blocks can now be used with any [persistence service](/docs/configuration/blockly/rules-blockly-persistence.html)
* Added pattern to [text of date block](/docs/configuration/blockly/rules-blockly-date-handling.html#get-string-representation-of-date-text-of)
* Support for [private and global cache](/docs/configuration/blockly/rules-blockly-value-storage.html#caching) when using the value storage blocks
* A new [Blockly dictionary loop](/docs/configuration/blockly/rules-blockly-standard-ext.html#loop-over-a-dictionary) block with value and key from dictionary
* Added stricter type checking for blocks to avoid mistakes
* Added numeric state, quantity state to getItemAttribute

Editor:

> * [Search](/docs/configuration/blockly/rules-blockly-before-using.html#searching-the-workspace) within the blockly workspace via Cmd/Ctrl-F

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* [Search](/docs/configuration/blockly/rules-blockly-before-using.html#searching-the-workspace) within the Blockly workspace via Cmd/Ctrl-F
```

* Shadow Blocks are now automatically converted to real blocks, which is good when you want to reuse them by duplicating the block 
* [Cross-Rule Copy & Paste](https://next.openhab.org/docs/configuration/blockly/rules-blockly-before-using.html#cross-rule-copy-paste)

All new blocks have received comprehensive documentation at the [Blockly Reference](/docs/configuration/blockly/).

### Scene Editor

> Given several discussions on the community, support for scenes was a long awaited feature — openHAB 4 has it.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Given several discussions in the community, support for scenes was a long awaited feature — openHAB 4 has it.
```

Basically, scenes are only a set of Items and states that the Items are commanded to when the scene is enabled.

> In openHAB, a simple rule would be enough to achieve that functionality, but it would either require some coding or several UI interactions.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
In openHAB, a simple rule would be enough to achieve this functionality, but it would either require some coding or several UI interactions.
```

The scene editor allows you to define Items and their respective target states very easily.

> A sync state button allows to store the current Item state as the target state, and another button allows you to test the currently defined target state.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
A sync state button allows storing the current Item state as the target state, and another button allows testing the currently defined target state.
```

Scenes can be triggered from Main UI widgets and, as they are basically just rules without triggers, from other rules. 

> One may wonder how to trigger scenes from BasicUI: In this case, you can create an Item and use the code tab of the scene to define it as a trigger.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
One may wonder how to trigger scenes from Basic UI: In this case, you can create an Item and use the code tab of the scene to define it as a trigger.
```

As most UI configuration pages, the persistence configuration page is divided into two tabs: A design and a code tab.

The design tab allows to graphically configure strategies and filters for selected Items, create new cron strategies (common ones are automatically created for you) and manage filters.
openHAB 4 also has a few new filters you should check out!

The code tab represents the persistence configuration in YAML code and is perfect for sharing, e.g. when asking for help on the forum, but everything can be configured without touching a single line of code.

<p align="center"><img style="max-width: 70%;" src="/uploads/2023-07-23-openhab-4-0-release/persistence-editor.png"/></p>

To try it yourself, open a persistence add-on’s settings from the add-on store and click on the blue “Persistence configuration” header.

### Developer Sidebar Search

In openHAB 3, the developer sidebar search was only able to find Items by name or label, Things by UID or label, rules by UID or name and pages by UID.

With openHAB 4, we gave it a big upgrade:
It is now possible to search inside nearly every UI entity. 

> No matter where, you find what you search for.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
No matter what, you find what you search for.
```

This finally changes with openHAB 4 with the introduction of a new UI element long-awaited by users: The `input` field.

```java
Input item=<itemname> [label="<labelname>"] [icon="<iconname>"] [inputHint="<inputHint>"]
```

This element allows entering of text, numbers and dates/times and updating the underlying items.
Text, number or number with unit values and dates/times can be updated in the respective Item types.

The parameter `inputHint` will give a hint to the user interface to use a specific widget adapted to a specific use.
For example, it can be a time picker or a date picker. Valid values for the parameter are `text`, `number`, `date`, `time` and `datetime`.
Support of these widget types vary by user interface and/or browser.

This new input field is already supported in Basic UI and in the Android app.

There are many use cases for this feature.
For example, it can be used for entering manual meter readings - or perhaps drawing attention from your family:

`items/tv.items`:

```java
Switch LGTV_Power "Power" { channel="lgwebos:WebOSTV:tv:power" }
Player LGTV_Control "Control" { channel="lgwebos:WebOSTV:tv:mediaPlayer" }

> String LGTV_Toast "Toast { channel="lgwebos:WebOSTV:tv:toast" }

Reviewer: Sorry, late finding from going through rendered version:
```suggestion
String LGTV_Toast "Toast" { channel="lgwebos:WebOSTV:tv:toast" }
```

```

`sitemaps/tv.sitemap`:

```perl

> sitemap multimedia label="TV" {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
sitemap tv label="TV" {
```

For more details including the new category/icon syntax, please read [the documentation](/docs/configuration/items.html#icons).

#### Managing your icon color

You can now control the icon color associated with any user interface element of a sitemap using the `iconcolor` parameter.
The syntax and capabilities behind this parameter are the same as for the `labelcolor` and `valuecolor` parameters, which means you can define multiple conditions leading to different colors.

This is not possible with icons from the classic icon set because these icons have a hard-coded color palette, but it is possible with icons from other icon sources and with user-added SVG icons using `currentColor` as the fill color.
Basic UI supports this color feature for openHAB icons only if an option is enabled.
Color support for other icon sources is supported by default.

For more details, please read [the documentation](/docs/ui/sitemaps.html#label-value-and-icon-colors).

#### Icons provided by bindings

A binding can now make specific icons related to channels available to the user, especially when no appropriate category/icon is available in the classic icon set.

> Few bindings have already integrated this feature, for example the [OpenUV binding](/addons/bindings/openuv/).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
A few bindings have already integrated this feature, for example the [OpenUV binding](/addons/bindings/openuv/).
```

## Add-on Enhancements

_Jacob Laursen, openHAB Maintainer_

17 new add-ons are included, adding support for new devices and services.

The [PLEX binding](/addons/bindings/plex/), which has been missing since version 2.x, is back!
The [Android TV binding](/addons/bindings/androidtv/) enables interaction with Google TV and Nvidia ShieldTV.
The [Ecovacs binding](/addons/bindings/ecovacs/) integrates a variety of vacuum cleaning/mopping robots.
The [Energi Data Service binding](/addons/bindings/energidataservice/) provides electricity prices primarily for Scandinavia, and with the [VAT transformation](/addons/transformations/vat/), VAT is included according to your configured country.
The [ChatGPT binding](/addons/bindings/chatgpt/) allows AI interactions where only your imagination sets limits to the usage. How about announcing the weather forecast in a personalized way on your preferred speaker?

Some existing bindings also received massive overhauls:

> The [Philips Hue binding](/addons/bindings/hue/) has been rewritten to support API v2, offering real-time updates from lights, switches and sensors.
> Similarly, the [Hunter Douglas PowerView binding](/addons/bindings/hdpowerview/) now supports the new PowerView Gen 3 system with blazingly fast updates.
> The [deCONZ binding](/addons/bindings/deconz/) has been improved with new features and many bugfixes and stability improvements.
> The [Freebox binding](/addons/bindings/freebox/) is replaced by a [new binding](/addons/bindings/freeboxos/) rewritten from scratch.
> The [KNX binding](/addons/bindings/knx/) introduces UoM support, respecting the DPT of a GA (group address), and has received a larger code refactoring with improved performance and stability.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- The [Philips Hue binding](/addons/bindings/hue/) has been rewritten to support API v2, offering real-time updates from lights, switches and sensors.
- Similarly, the [Hunter Douglas PowerView binding](/addons/bindings/hdpowerview/) now supports the new PowerView Gen 3 system with blazingly fast updates.
- The [deCONZ binding](/addons/bindings/deconz/) has been improved with new features and many bugfixes and stability improvements.
- The [Freebox binding](/addons/bindings/freebox/) is replaced by a [new binding](/addons/bindings/freeboxos/) rewritten from scratch.
- The [KNX binding](/addons/bindings/knx/) introduces UoM support, respecting the DPT of a GA (group address), and has received a larger code refactoring with improved performance and stability.
```
